“It is worth asking why the national novels of Latin America– the ones
that governments institutionalized in the schools and that are now
indistinguishable from patriotic histories– are all love stories. An
easy answer, of course, is that nineteenth-century novels were all love
stories in Latin America” @Sommer1991 [30].

This needs addressed... Why can’t it be a chronological phenomenon and
these novels exhibits characteristics beyond romance that have
positioned tham in the foundational canon. The linguistic/lexical
contribution of these works shouldn’t be overlooked

These novels were excluded from the first national literary histories.
The “programmatic centrality of novels came a generation later [...]
afer renewed internal oppositions pulled the image of an ideal nation
away from the existing state” @Sommer1991 [30].

“each romance shares far more than its institutional status with others.
The resemblances may be symptomatic of nationalism’s general paradox;
that is, cultural features that seem unique and worthy of patriotic
(self)-celebration are often typical of other nations too and even
patterned after foreign models” @Sommer1991 [31].

The question I would ask then is how much similarity or difference do
they actually display when compared with: 1. other writings at the time
(story, poem, news, etc.) 2. other novels of equal standing from other
countries

Sommer states that one purpoese of her volume is to “account for the
generic coherence that individual readings will necessarily miss”
@Sommer1991 [31].

Nancy Armstrong is quoted in Sommer saying “the formation of the modern
political state– in England at least– was accomplished largely through
cultural hegemony, primarily through the domestic novel.” Sommer
continues “this is possibly true for Latin America as well, where, along
with constitutions and civil codes, novels helped to legislate modern
mores” (33).

Sommer compares Foucault and Anderson whose books she says overlap the
question of desire and patriotism as “timeless and essential to the
human condition” (33). These ideas intersect at their origin which each
author claims to be the end of the eighteenth century @Sommer1991 [33].

She notes that Foucault makes important insights but fails to
acknowledge heterosexual exhibitionism, the novel, and the invention of
modern states @Sommer1991 [37].

Anderson in Sommer “nationalism is not ’aligned’ to abstract ideologies
such as liberalism or marxism but is mystically inflected from the
religious cultural systems ’out of which - as well as against which- it
came into being” (37).

sexuality and racism (38)

"Unlike Foucaults dour tracing of sexuality to a priestfood of
moralizers and pseudo-scientists, Anderson locates the production of
nationalsm precisely in the space of our democratically shared
imagination, the private spce of novels that links us serially and
horizontally through a ’print community’ @Sommer1991 [39].

Another reason to suggest that mining newspapers could provide insight.

Anderson “doesn’t discuss the passions constructed by reading novels, or
their ideal gender models that were teaching future republicans to be
passionate in a rational and seductively horizontal way” @Sommer1991
[40].

Sommer defines allegory as a “narrative structure in which one line is a
trace of the other” but admits a more standard interpretation as “a
narrative with two parallel levels of signification” (42).

Sommer notes that the foundational fictions are “philosophically modest,
even sloppy” and also says that, with the excepcion of María, these
novels “do not actively worry about any incommensurability between Truth
and Justice” (45).

“foundational novels are precisely those fictions that try to pass for
truth and to become the ground for political association” @Sommer1991
[45].

can someting of this difference be seen through topic modeling? Would
María produce a more polemic list of discourses?

“If we ’know’ from reading Amalia that Rosas was an unscrupulous
dictator, our knowledge is to a considerable degree a political
articulation of the erotic frustration we share with Amalia and Eduardo.
And we feel the intensity of their frustration because we know that
their obstacle is the norrible dictator” @Sommer1991 [47].

“José Hernandez developed an already existing genre of politically
conciliatory poems that, as Josefina Ludmer masterfully shows,
constructed a national voice by appropriating the language of
’authentic’ but notoriously shiftless Argentines for patriotic and
economically rational projects” @Sommer1991 [111].

Chapter 6
=========

“*María’s* canonical status is surprising, almost perverse” @Sommer1991
[172].

“*María* neither projects futures nor finds any obstacle that it might
hope to overcome” @Sommer1991 [172]. I disagree with this, depending on
the rest of the article, I think it does make subtle statements about
obstacles and the future after all it was Efraíns leaving to become a
doctor, see ciudad letrada, that kills Maria... this issupported I think
by a discussion between Efrain and his dad about his education in Europe
bringing wealth and stability to the family

on the hebrew aspect of the novel (to which Beckman has a different
response) “I suspect that before 1867 the flamboyantly Hebrew name may
have been as foreign as the converso father that chose it for his son”
@Sommer1991 [173].

It appears in Davies corpora more prominently in the 1600’s, disappears
in the 1700’s and grow steadily thereafter interestingly in the 1900’s
it appears predominantly in the newspapers re wikipedia Jew came to
Colombia from Jamaica at the end of s18 and Judaism was made legal after
independence, it also points out that the families were concentrated in
the Cauca valley

“the problem is being Jewish, a double bind that becomes Isaac’s vehicle
for representing a dead end for the planter class” @Sommer1991 [173]

“these novels demand a possible solution o failed romance (read also
national progress and productivity)” @Sommer1991 [174].

“it has no apparent political or social causality, no racial hatred, no
regional conflicts” @Sommer1991 [174].

Again, disagree, I think Isaacs subtle treatment of Colombian political
and social dynamics is less apparent because it was written for a
Colombian audience, even more specifically, an audience familiar with
Cauca

180 - 182 Implications of the Cons/Lib divide mid-century and the fall
of the ’plantocracy’ “on a second reading at least, is about the end of
an entire social system”

185-6 Jewishness in the novel and Colombia

“at one point Efraín indulgently, or disdainfully, explains his father’s
superstition as a vestige of his Jewishness”

“Isaacs is most ambivalnent in his description of María herself”
@Sommer1991 [192]

“Apparently, the narrator (and Isaacs), is caught between the poles of
ethnic identification, unsure whether ”Jew“ is a religious affiliation
that on can convert out of ot a race that is biologically and indelibly
fixed” @Sommer1991 [194].

Great connection to Chiaramonte and the discussion of the ethnic
connotations of “nation”

194 The discussion with Transito about white people riding horses

197 - Sexuality, Marías illness as histeria Efraín must choose between
Domestic cure (sex) and conservative cure (restraint) he opts for filial
loyalty Sommers analogizes this to Colombias planter versus black
conflict Efraín’s “caution or cowardice has everything to do with
Colombias’s national frustrations. The question for Isaacs class was
whether to satisfy the blacks’ and the liberal whites’ desire for
change, or to control those desires and forestall a racially mixed,
possibly monstrous progeny” @Sommer1991 [198].

through metonymy Isaacs displaces “race riots for María’s epilepsy”
@Sommer1991 [200]

the tale of Nay and Sinar takes it to metaphor “as if Isaacs were
purposefully pointing our symptomatic reading back to the obsessive
experience he cannot mention (race riots)” @Sommer1991 [200]

“Isaacs was not displacing one fearsome race for another more promising
on in the interest of constructing a national myth. On the contrary; he
seems to be saying that no myth of amalgamation is possible, because the
patriarchal world he yearns for will not have it” “he displaced the
inassimilable black masses and the anachronistic planters onto his
innocent but flawed Jewish heroine” @Sommer1991 [202]

